---
title: "Alan D. Kaplan"
---

#### Research Scientist, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
#### Machine learning, statistical signal processing, applications
#### [Google scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=ZwBxbEUAAAAJ&hl=en)

---
## Research Areas
### Precision Medicine
Tailoring medical treatment to individual needs requires an understanding of treatment heterogeneity. Many of the answers to this problem lie within existing medical record databases. In my research, I develop probabilistic machine learning methods to model clinical datasets. These methods work with datasets that contain significant missing values, heterogenious data types, and longitudinal sequences. 
For Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), we formulated a modeling approach based on mixtures of distributions to subtype classes of injury. This approach quantifies phenotypes associated with each patient subtype, and improves specificity of outcome prediction.
Intensive care datasets contain high sample rate data that can be described in several sequences of varying length. We developed a model formulation that characterizes subtypes in this setting. This model allows for irregularly samples sequnces of different lengths and can be used to subtype patients and predict future outcomes.
In the outpatient settings, very long sequences of clincial data elements are recorded. The temporal effect can vary depending on the measure and time difference between measurements. I developed an approach that models time-dependent bivariate distributions and applied this approach to data from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA).

* Alan D Kaplan, John D Greene, Vincent X Liu, and Priyadip Ray. “Unsupervised probabilistic models for sequential Electronic Health Records”. In: J. Biomed. Inform. 134 (Oct. 2022), p. 104163.
* Alan D Kaplan, Uttara Tipnis, Jean C Beckham, Nathan A Kimbrel, David W Oslin, and Benjamin H McMahon. “Continuous‐time probabilisticmodelsfor longitudinal electronic health records”. In: J. Biomed. Inform. 130 (June 2022), p. 104084.
* Alan D Kaplan, Qi Cheng, Kadri Aditya Mohan, Lindsay D Nelson, Sonia Jain, Harvey Levin, Abel Torres‐Espin, Austin Chou, J Russell Huie, Adam R Ferguson, Michael Mccrea, Joseph Giacino, Shivshankar Sundaram, Amy J Markowitz, and Geoffrey T Manley. “Mixture Model Framework for Traumatic Brain Injury Prognosis Using Het‐ erogeneous Clinical and Outcome Data”. en. In: IEEE J Biomed Health Inform PP (July 2021).

### Neural signal analysis
My work in computational aspects of neuroscience includes the development of statistical models for Electrocorticography (ECoG). We study the correlates between ~100 sensor arrays implanted intracranially in human patients undergoing preoperative epilepsy monitoring and video cues of emotional affect. This work addresses the question of discovering quantitative biomarkers linking brain activity with underlying emotion and mood. The developed approaches utilize time-frequency decompositions of the ECoG signals and are capable of producing spatial maps which indicate the level of discriminability with respect to emotional affect.

* Alan D Kaplan, Q Cheng, P Karande, E Tran, M Bijanzadeh, H Dawes, and E Chang. “Localization of Emotional Affect in Electrocorticography Using a Model Based Discrimination Measure”. In: 2019 53rd Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers. Nov. 2019, pp. 1709–1713.
* Q Cheng, A D Kaplan, P Karande, M Bijanzadeh, H Dawes, and E Chang. “Emotion Discrimination through Electrode Network Connectivity Pattern Recognition”. In: 2019 53rd Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers. Nov. 2019, pp. 2139–2143.

### Pulse shape discrimination
Detailed signals acquired from scintillator devices can be used to distinguish nuclear particles, such as neutrons and gammas. In the low energy regime, standard heuristic approaches often fail to correctly classify particle type. I developed techniques leveraging statistical modeling approaches to enable more accurate classification for lower particle energies. The models are based on partially observed ground truth (labels) for each pulse that is recorded and consist of mixtures of unknown Gaussian templates. We implemented and brought the software design of the required algorithms to a high level of software engineering, including a fast FPGA implementation.

* Andrew Glenn, Qi Cheng, Alan D Kaplan, and Ron Wurtz. “Pulse pileup rejection methods using a two‐component Gaussian Mixture Model for fast neutron detection with pulse shape discriminating scintillator”. In: Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 988 (Feb. 2021), p. 164905.
* Brenton Blair, Cliff Chen, Andrew Glenn, Alan Kaplan, Jaime Ruz, Lance Simms, and Ron Wurtz. “Gaussian mixture models as automated particle classifiers for fast neutron detectors”. In: Stat Anal Data Min: The ASA Data Sci Journal 856 (July 2019), p. 26.
* Alan D Kaplan, Brenton Blair, Cliff Chen, Andrew Glenn, Jaime Ruz, and Ron Wurtz. “A neutron‐gamma pulse shape discrimination method based on pure and mixed sources”. In: Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 919 (Mar. 2019), pp. 36–41.
* Ron Wurtz, Brenton Blair, Cliff Chen, Andrew Glenn, Alan D Kaplan, Paul Rosenfield, Jaime Ruz, and Lance M Simms. “Methodology and performance comparison of statistical learning pulse shape classifiers as demonstrated with organic liquid scintillator”. In: Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 901 (Sept. 2018), pp. 46–55.
* Lance M Simms, Brenton Blair, Jaime Ruz, Ron Wurtz, Alan D Kaplan, and Andrew Glenn. “Pulse discrimination with a Gaussian mixture model on an FPGA”. In: Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 900 (Aug. 2018), pp. 1–7.
* K P Lennox, P Rosenfield, B Blair, A D Kaplan, J Ruz, A Glenn, and R & Wurtz. “Assessing and Minimizing Contamination in Time of Flight Based Validation Data”. In: Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A (2017).

### Computer vision applications
In our work, we design and implement computer vision techniques to a variety of areas. In one work, we use a convolutional neural network to detect emotional affect in facial imagery. As in many computer vision problems, the availability of training data with ground truth labels is a limiting factor. There, we leverage a large dataset without ground truth labels and show improvement in performance in the data of interest. In another area, we developed methods for quality control in advanced manufacuring processes. We implemented a real-time system to detect flaws in a microencapsulation system. Our classification algorithm actuated a valve that improved the quality of resulting microcapsules in real-time. Using similar techniques, we developed methods for identifying flaws in 3-D printing systems. In the area of medical imaging, we developed an approach for representation learning that spatially corresponds acorss images.

* Kadri Aditya Mohan and Alan D Kaplan. “AutoAtlas: Neural Network for 3D Unsupervised Partitioning and Representation Learning”. In: IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics (2021), pp. 1–1.
* Albert B Chu, Du Nguyen, Alan D Kaplan, and Brian Giera. “Image classification and control of microfluidic systems”. In: Applications of Machine Learning. Vol. 11139. International Society for Optics and Photonics, Sept. 2019, p. 1113906.
* A B Chu, M Murialdo, J P Lewicki, J N Rodriguez, M K Shiflett, B Giera, and A D Kaplan. “Image Classification of Clogs in Direct Ink Write Additive Manufacturing”. In: 2019 18th IEEE International Conference On Machine Learning And Applications (ICMLA). Dec. 2019, pp. 1342–1347.
* Albert Chu, Du Nguyen, Sachin S Talathi, Aaron C Wilson, Congwang Ye, William L Smith, Alan D Kaplan, Eric B Duoss, Joshua K Stolaroff, and Brian Giera. “Automated detection and sorting of microencapsulation via machine learning”. en. In: Lab Chip 19.10 (May 2019), pp. 1808–1817.
* Elizabeth Tran, Michael B Mayhew, Hyojin Kim, Piyush Karande, and Alan D Kaplan. “Facial Expression Recognition Using a Large Out‐of‐Context Dataset”. In: 2018 IEEE Winter Applications of Computer Vision Workshops (WACVW). ieeexplore.ieee.org, 2018, pp. 52–59.

### Cardiovascular biometrics
Cardiovascular activity can be measured noninvasively and with noncontact sensors. Electrical activity can be recorded using the traditional Electrocardiogram (ECG) setup, but hemodynamics can also be captured in the mechanical domain. We developed the use of Laser Doppler Vibrometry (LDV), which can be used to measure surface vibrations, for remote sensing of cardiovascular activity. We designed and implemented models and associated algorithms for LDVs signals acquired from the skin overlying the carotid artery. These signals can be acquired in a noncontact and standoff manner and they represent underlying hemodynamics in the carotid. The models capture varying scales of temporal dynamics reflected in the signal. At the lowest level, millisecond level dynamics due to the underlying blood pressure are observed. At the next level, cardiorespiratory effects alter the shape of the pulse across heartbeat. At the higher levels, changes occurring on longer times scales were considered. This work enables the use of the LDV in clinical settings where skin contact is either unavailable or undesirable, such as the case with MRI gating or neonatal patients. In addition to LDV, we also performed a comparative analysis of methods for biometric identity verification using traditional Electrocardiogram data.

* Alan D Kaplan, Joseph A O’Sullivan, Erik J Sirevaag, Po‐Hsiang Lai, and John W Rohrbaugh. “Hidden state models for noncontact measurements of the carotid pulse using a laser Doppler vibrometer”. en. In: IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59.3 (Mar. 2012), pp. 744–753.
* I Odinaka, P H Lai, A D Kaplan, J A O’Sullivan, E J Sirevaag, and J W Rohrbaugh. “ECG Biometric Recognition: A Comparative Analysis”. In: IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 7.6 (Dec. 2012), pp. 1812–1824.
* Alan D Kaplan, Joseph A O’Sullivan, Erik J Sirevaag, Sean D Kristjansson, Po‐Hsiang Lai, and John W Rohrbaugh. “Hidden state dynamics in laser Doppler vibrometery measurements of the carotid pulse under resting conditions”. en. In: Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2010 (2010), pp. 5273–5276.
* M Chen, J A O’Sullivan, N Singla, E J Sirevaag, S D Kristjansson, P H Lai, A D Kaplan, and J W Rohrbaugh. “Laser Doppler Vibrometry Measures of Physiological Function: Evaluation of Biometric Capabilities”. In: IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 5.3 (2010), pp. 449–460.
* I Odinaka, P H Lai, A D Kaplan, J A O’Sullivan, E J Sirevaag, S D Kristjansson, A K Sheffield, and J W Rohrbaugh. “ECG biometrics: A robust short‐time frequency analysis”. In: 2010 IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security. ieeexplore.ieee.org, Dec. 2010, pp. 1–6.
* I Odinaka, P H Lai, A D Kaplan, and J A O’Sullivan. “On estimating biometric capacity: An example based on LDV biometrics”. In: 2010 48th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton). 2010, pp. 146–151.
* M Chen, J A O’Sullivan, A D Kaplan, P H Lai, E J Sirevaag, and J W Rohrbaugh. “Biometrics with physical exercise using Laser Doppler Vibrometry measurements of the carotid pulse”. In: 2009 First IEEE International Conference on Biometrics, Identity and Security (BIdS). ieeexplore.ieee.org, 2009, pp. 1–6.
* Alan D Kaplan, Joseph A O’Sullivan, Erik J Sirevaag, and John W Rohrbaugh. “Laser Doppler vibrometry measure‐ ments of the carotid pulse: biometrics using hidden Markov models”. In: Optics and Photonics in Global Homeland Security V and Biometric Technology for Human Identification VI. Vol. 7306. International Society for Optics and Photonics, May 2009, p. 730624.
* P H Lai, J A O’Sullivan, M Chen, E J Sirevaag, A D Kaplan, and J W Rohrbaugh. “A robust feature selection method for noncontact biometrics based on Laser Doppler Vibrometry”. In: 2008 Biometrics Symposium. ieeexplore.ieee.org, 2008, pp. 65–70.
